Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the non-depolarising neuromuscular blocking drugs.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
We turn to the non-depolarising neuromuscular blocking drugs. Classify them.
The non-depolarising neuromuscular blockers are competitive antagonists at the
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor of the neuromuscular junction,
used to provide muscle relaxation for surgery and to facilitate intubation and
ventilation.
They are classified chemically into two families.
The aminosteroids — rocuronium, vecuronium and pancuronium — are based on a steroid
nucleus. The benzylisoquinoliniums — atracurium,
cisatracurium and mivacurium — are based on a benzylisoquinolinium structure.
This chemical classification is clinically useful because it tracks important
properties: the benzylisoquinoliniums tend to release histamine and include the
organ-independent Hofmann-eliminated agents,
while the aminosteroids do not release histamine and the relevant ones,
rocuronium and vecuronium, can be reversed by sugammadex.
They can also be grouped by duration into short-,
intermediate- and long-acting agents. So chemistry and duration together organise
the class.
Describe their mechanism of action and how it differs from suxamethonium.
The non-depolarising agents act as competitive antagonists:
they bind to the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor at the neuromuscular junction
without activating it, blocking access of acetylcholine to its binding site,
so that the end-plate is not depolarised and the muscle is not stimulated.
Because they compete with acetylcholine,
the block can be overcome by increasing the local concentration of acetylcholine,
which is the basis of reversal with anticholinesterases.
Unlike suxamethonium there are no initial fasciculations,
since the end-plate is never depolarised.
On nerve stimulation the block shows the characteristic features of a
non-depolarising block: fade, a progressive decline in the response to successive
stimuli of a train-of-four or to tetanic stimulation,
and post-tetanic potentiation, both reflecting effects on acetylcholine release and
receptor occupancy.
So it is a competitive, reversible, non-depolarising block, monitored by its fade.
What is the relationship between potency and onset?
There is an inverse relationship between potency and speed of onset among these
agents: the more potent the drug, the slower its onset, and the less potent,
the faster.
The explanation is that, for a given effect,
fewer molecules of a potent drug are given,
so fewer molecules are present to diffuse to and occupy the receptors,
whereas a less potent drug is given in larger numbers of molecules,
creating a steeper concentration gradient that drives faster diffusion to the
junction and faster onset.
This is why rocuronium, which is relatively less potent,
has the fastest onset of the non-depolarising agents and is used for rapid-sequence
induction, whereas the more potent agents are slower in onset.
So onset speed is, somewhat counter-intuitively, favoured by lower potency.
Take me through the pharmacokinetics and elimination of the individual agents,
beginning with atracurium and cisatracurium.
Atracurium and cisatracurium are notable for organ-independent elimination.
Atracurium is eliminated by two routes: Hofmann elimination, a spontaneous,
non-enzymatic breakdown that occurs at body temperature and physiological pH,
independent of organ function; and ester hydrolysis.
Cisatracurium, a single isomer of atracurium,
is eliminated predominantly by Hofmann elimination.
Because their breakdown does not depend on the liver or kidneys,
both are ideal in hepatic and renal failure and in the critically ill,
with a predictable duration.
A metabolite of Hofmann elimination is laudanosine,
a central nervous system stimulant that can in theory lower the seizure threshold
with very large doses, though this is rarely of clinical significance and is less
with cisatracurium.
So these benzylisoquinoliniums offer reliable, organ-independent offset,
which is their great advantage.
Continue with the aminosteroids and mivacurium.
The aminosteroids depend on the liver and kidney.
Rocuronium is eliminated mainly by the liver, with some renal excretion,
and has an intermediate duration and the fastest onset of the group.
Vecuronium is metabolised in the liver and excreted in bile and urine,
also intermediate-acting, with an active metabolite that can accumulate in renal
failure and prolong block in the critically ill.
Pancuronium is long-acting and excreted predominantly by the kidney,
so it accumulates in renal impairment.
Mivacurium, a benzylisoquinolinium,
is unusual in being metabolised by plasma cholinesterase, like suxamethonium,
giving it a short duration, and it is correspondingly prolonged in plasma
cholinesterase deficiency.
So elimination varies from the organ-independent atracurium and cisatracurium,
through the hepatically and renally cleared aminosteroids,
to the cholinesterase-dependent mivacurium,
which dictates the choice in organ failure.
How is neuromuscular block monitored?
Neuromuscular block is monitored objectively with a peripheral nerve stimulator,
ideally quantitatively, applied over a peripheral nerve while the evoked muscle
response is assessed.
The standard pattern is the train-of-four: four stimuli,
the number of detectable twitches indicating the depth of block,
and the ratio of the fourth to the first twitch — the train-of-four ratio —
quantifying recovery, with fade reflecting non-depolarising block.
For deep block, when there are no train-of-four twitches,
the post-tetanic count is used to gauge depth.
Adequate recovery before extubation requires a train-of-four ratio of at least
ninety per cent, ideally measured quantitatively rather than judged by eye,
because clinical signs and visual assessment miss significant residual block.
So monitoring guides dosing, indicates when reversal is possible,
and confirms adequate recovery, which is essential to safe practice.
Describe the individual agents' profiles in clinical use, starting with rocuronium.
Rocuronium is the most widely used,
an intermediate-acting aminosteroid with the fastest onset of the non-depolarising
agents, so that in a higher dose it can provide intubating conditions approaching
those of suxamethonium, making it the agent of choice for rapid-sequence induction
when a non-depolarising drug is used,
especially as it can be rapidly reversed by sugammadex.
It does not release histamine and is cardiovascularly stable.
Vecuronium is a similar intermediate-acting aminosteroid,
also histamine-sparing and stable, with the caveat of accumulation of its active
metabolite in renal failure.
Pancuronium is long-acting and causes a vagolytic tachycardia, now little used.
So rocuronium is the versatile workhorse, vecuronium a stable alternative,
and pancuronium a long-acting agent of declining use.
And the benzylisoquinoliniums in clinical use?
Atracurium is an intermediate-acting agent whose organ-independent Hofmann
elimination makes it reliable in hepatic and renal failure,
its drawback being histamine release, which can cause flushing,
a transient fall in blood pressure and, rarely, bronchospasm,
particularly with rapid or large doses.
Cisatracurium, the single isomer, shares the organ-independent elimination but is
more potent and does not release histamine in clinical doses,
giving the same reliability without the histamine effects,
at the cost of a slightly slower onset;
it is favoured in the critically ill and where cardiovascular stability matters.
Mivacurium is short-acting, metabolised by plasma cholinesterase,
useful for short procedures, but it releases histamine and is prolonged in
cholinesterase deficiency.
So cisatracurium is the clean, organ-independent agent of choice in organ failure,
atracurium its histamine-releasing relative, and mivacurium the short-acting one.
What are the cardiovascular and other adverse effects of these agents?
The main adverse effects differ by agent. Histamine release,
from atracurium and mivacurium, causes flushing, hypotension,
tachycardia and occasionally bronchospasm,
mitigated by slow injection and dose limitation.
Pancuronium blocks cardiac muscarinic receptors,
causing a vagolytic tachycardia and a rise in blood pressure.
The aminosteroids and cisatracurium are largely free of significant cardiovascular
effects.
Across the class, the neuromuscular blockers are among the commonest causes of
perioperative anaphylaxis, rocuronium and suxamethonium being particularly
implicated, with cross-reactivity between agents.
Residual neuromuscular block, from inadequate recovery or reversal,
is itself an important hazard, causing weakness, airway obstruction and aspiration.
Laudanosine accumulation from atracurium is a theoretical concern only.
So histamine release, vagolysis with pancuronium,
anaphylaxis and residual block are the key adverse effects.
Why is residual neuromuscular block important, and how is it avoided?
Residual neuromuscular block — incomplete recovery of neuromuscular function at the
end of anaesthesia — is important because even a modest degree,
a train-of-four ratio below ninety per cent,
impairs the pharyngeal and upper-airway muscles and the hypoxic ventilatory
response, causing airway obstruction,
impaired swallowing with a risk of aspiration,
and respiratory complications in recovery,
and it is common and frequently undetected when block is judged clinically.
It is avoided by using quantitative neuromuscular monitoring throughout,
by not giving more relaxant than needed,
by ensuring adequate recovery or reversal before extubation — confirming a
train-of-four ratio of at least ninety per cent — and by reversing the block
reliably, either with an anticholinesterase when recovery has begun or with
sugammadex for the aminosteroids, which can reverse even deep block.
So objective monitoring and reliable reversal are the means to prevent this
under-recognised hazard.
How does the choice of agent change in hepatic and renal failure?
In hepatic and renal failure I would choose an agent whose elimination does not
depend on those organs, namely cisatracurium, or atracurium,
both eliminated by organ-independent Hofmann elimination,
giving a predictable duration without accumulation;
cisatracurium is preferred for its lack of histamine release.
I would avoid or use cautiously the agents that accumulate: pancuronium,
which is renally excreted and long-acting; vecuronium,
whose active metabolite accumulates in renal failure; and rocuronium,
which is prolonged in hepatic and to some extent renal impairment,
though it can be reversed by sugammadex.
Mivacurium is prolonged where plasma cholinesterase is reduced,
as may occur in liver disease. So the organ-independent benzylisoquinoliniums,
especially cisatracurium, are the agents of choice in organ failure,
which is one of the most useful practical points about this class.
Pull it together: how do you use the non-depolarising blockers safely?
I would choose the agent to suit the case:
rocuronium as the versatile workhorse and for rapid-sequence induction when a
non-depolarising drug is used, with sugammadex available;
cisatracurium or atracurium where organ-independent elimination is wanted,
as in hepatic or renal failure and the critically ill;
and a short-acting agent for brief procedures.
I would dose to effect, avoiding excess,
and monitor the block quantitatively throughout with a nerve stimulator,
using the train-of-four and, for deep block, the post-tetanic count.
I would ensure adequate recovery before extubation,
confirming a train-of-four ratio of at least ninety per cent,
reversing the block reliably — with an anticholinesterase once recovery has begun,
or with sugammadex for the aminosteroids including deep block — to prevent residual
paralysis.
And I would be alert to histamine release, to anaphylaxis,
and to the agents that accumulate in organ failure.
So appropriate agent choice, quantitative monitoring and reliable reversal are the
foundations of safe use.
Relate the structures of the two families to their properties.
The aminosteroids — rocuronium, vecuronium and pancuronium — are built on a steroid
nucleus and share the properties of not releasing histamine and of being reversible
by sugammadex, which encapsulates their steroidal structure;
they depend on the liver and kidney for elimination.
The benzylisoquinoliniums — atracurium,
cisatracurium and mivacurium — are based on a benzylisoquinolinium structure,
and as a group tend to release histamine,
although cisatracurium does so negligibly, and they are not reversed by sugammadex;
atracurium and cisatracurium uniquely undergo organ-independent Hofmann
elimination, and mivacurium is broken down by plasma cholinesterase.
So the chemical family predicts the pattern of histamine release,
the route of elimination and susceptibility to sugammadex reversal,
which is why the structural classification is so clinically useful in choosing an
agent and planning its reversal.
Give onset and offset characteristics for the main agents.
Rocuronium has the fastest onset of the group,
giving intubating conditions in around sixty to ninety seconds at standard dose and
faster at the higher rapid-sequence dose,
with an intermediate duration of around thirty to forty minutes.
Vecuronium and atracurium and cisatracurium are intermediate-acting,
with onset around two to three minutes and duration around thirty to forty-five
minutes, cisatracurium being a little slower in onset because of its potency.
Mivacurium is short-acting, with a duration of around fifteen to twenty minutes.
Pancuronium is long-acting, with a slow onset and a duration of an hour or more.
So rocuronium is chosen where rapid onset matters, mivacurium for short procedures,
the intermediate agents for routine use,
and pancuronium where a long block is acceptable.
Explain the principle of priming.
Priming is a technique to speed the onset of a non-depolarising block.
A small, sub-paralysing priming dose is given a few minutes before the main
intubating dose, the idea being that it occupies a proportion of the receptors so
the main dose achieves blocking conditions more quickly.
Its drawbacks are that the priming dose can cause weakness,
diplopia and difficulty swallowing in the awake patient, with a risk of aspiration,
and the improvement in onset is modest.
With rocuronium offering a rapid onset at a higher dose,
and suxamethonium the fastest onset, priming is now little used.
So priming is a method of hastening onset that has largely been superseded,
but it illustrates the principle that partial receptor occupancy speeds the
subsequent block.
Give the rocuronium dose and timing for rapid-sequence induction.
For routine intubation rocuronium is given at about six-tenths of a milligram per
kilogram, but for rapid-sequence induction a larger dose,
of the order of one to one-and-a-half milligrams per kilogram, is used,
which shortens the onset to give intubating conditions within around sixty seconds,
approaching those of suxamethonium.
The price of the larger dose is a long duration of block, of an hour or more,
but this is now acceptable because the block can be rapidly reversed at any depth
by sugammadex, so that a failed intubation can be managed by prompt reversal.
This rocuronium-and-sugammadex strategy is the basis for using a non-depolarising
agent for rapid-sequence induction in place of suxamethonium.
So a higher rocuronium dose buys near-suxamethonium onset,
with sugammadex providing the rescue reversibility.
Tell me about atracurium's histamine release.
Atracurium releases histamine, particularly with rapid injection or large doses,
through a direct, non-immunological action on mast cells.
The consequences are cutaneous flushing,
a transient fall in blood pressure from vasodilatation, a reflex tachycardia,
and occasionally bronchospasm. These effects are usually mild and transient and are
mitigated by injecting the drug slowly and avoiding large bolus doses.
They are more of a concern in the haemodynamically fragile and the asthmatic.
The histamine release is the main drawback of atracurium and the principal reason
cisatracurium, which does not release histamine in clinical doses,
is often preferred where cardiovascular stability matters,
while retaining the same organ-independent elimination.
So atracurium's histamine release is a recognised, dose- and rate-dependent effect,
mitigated by slow injection and avoided by choosing cisatracurium.
What is laudanosine, and how significant is it?
Laudanosine is a product of the Hofmann degradation of atracurium and,
to a lesser extent, cisatracurium.
It is a tertiary amine that crosses the blood-brain barrier and,
at high concentrations in animal studies,
is a central nervous system stimulant capable of lowering the seizure threshold and
causing convulsions.
In clinical practice, however, the concentrations of laudanosine reached are well
below this threshold, so it is of theoretical rather than practical concern,
even with prolonged atracurium infusion.
It accumulates in renal and hepatic failure because it is cleared by those organs,
but again not usually to harmful levels. Cisatracurium,
being more potent and given in smaller amounts, generates less laudanosine,
which is one of its advantages.
So laudanosine is a real metabolite but a clinically minor concern at usual doses.
Summarise the advantages of cisatracurium.
Cisatracurium is a single isomer of atracurium with several advantages.
It undergoes organ-independent Hofmann elimination,
so its duration is predictable and it does not accumulate in hepatic or renal
failure, making it ideal in organ dysfunction and the critically ill.
Being more potent than atracurium, it is given in smaller amounts,
and it does not release histamine in clinical doses,
so it is cardiovascularly stable and free of the flushing and hypotension of
atracurium, and it generates less laudanosine.
Its only minor disadvantage is a slightly slower onset,
a consequence of its greater potency.
So cisatracurium combines reliable organ-independent elimination with
cardiovascular stability, which is why it is the agent of choice for the patient in
organ failure and where haemodynamic stability is important.
Describe mivacurium and vecuronium.
Mivacurium is a short-acting benzylisoquinolinium,
unusual in being metabolised by plasma cholinesterase, like suxamethonium,
which gives it a short duration of around fifteen to twenty minutes,
useful for short procedures; its action is correspondingly prolonged in plasma
cholinesterase deficiency, and it releases some histamine.
Vecuronium is an intermediate-acting aminosteroid,
cardiovascularly stable and histamine-sparing,
metabolised in the liver and excreted in bile and urine;
it has an active metabolite that can accumulate in renal failure and,
with prolonged use in the critically ill,
has been associated with persistent weakness.
Vecuronium, like rocuronium, is reversible by sugammadex.
So mivacurium is the short-acting, cholinesterase-dependent agent,
and vecuronium a stable intermediate aminosteroid with the caveat of metabolite
accumulation in renal failure.
What is the significance of critical-illness-associated weakness with these agents?
Prolonged use of neuromuscular blockers in the critically ill,
particularly the aminosteroids and especially in combination with corticosteroids,
has been associated with a persistent weakness after the drug is stopped,
part of the broader picture of critical-illness myopathy and neuropathy,
which prolongs ventilation and rehabilitation.
Vecuronium and rocuronium with concurrent steroids are particularly implicated.
The implications are to minimise the use and duration of neuromuscular blockade in
intensive care, to monitor the depth with a nerve stimulator and use the lowest
effective dose, to interrupt the block regularly, and to prefer,
where prolonged blockade is needed,
an organ-independent agent such as cisatracurium.
So prolonged neuromuscular blockade in the critically ill carries a risk of lasting
weakness, which shapes its cautious, monitored, minimised use.
Where are the monitoring sites, and why does the response differ between muscles?
Neuromuscular block is usually monitored at the adductor pollicis,
stimulating the ulnar nerve at the wrist and observing thumb adduction,
which is convenient and well validated,
or at the facial nerve observing the orbicularis oculi or corrugator supercilii.
The muscles differ in their sensitivity and time course:
the centrally important muscles — the diaphragm and the laryngeal adductors — are
relatively resistant to block, so they are paralysed and recover earlier than the
peripheral adductor pollicis, whereas the adductor pollicis is more sensitive and
recovers later.
The practical consequences are that the laryngeal muscles relax quickly for
intubation, monitored at the more sensitive adductor pollicis underestimates
recovery of the airway muscles, and confirming recovery at the adductor pollicis is
a conservative, safe indicator of adequate recovery everywhere.
So monitoring site matters, and the adductor pollicis is the safe reference for
recovery.
What factors potentiate a non-depolarising block?
Several factors deepen and prolong a non-depolarising block.
The volatile anaesthetic agents potentiate it markedly,
so less relaxant is needed under a volatile-based anaesthetic.
Certain antibiotics, notably the aminoglycosides, potentiate the block.
Hypothermia prolongs it by slowing metabolism and elimination.
Acid-base and electrolyte disturbances matter: respiratory acidosis, hypokalaemia,
hypocalcaemia and especially hypermagnesaemia — as in the patient treated with
magnesium for pre-eclampsia — all potentiate the block.
Local anaesthetics and some other drugs add to it.
And myasthenia gravis greatly increases sensitivity.
The practical lesson is to anticipate a deeper, longer block,
and to reduce the dose and monitor carefully,
in the patient on magnesium or aminoglycosides, the hypothermic,
the acidotic or hypokalaemic, and the myasthenic.
So a range of drugs and physiological disturbances potentiate the block.
And what factors antagonise or shorten the block?
Fewer factors antagonise a non-depolarising block, but they are worth knowing.
Chronic therapy with enzyme-inducing anticonvulsants such as phenytoin and
carbamazepine is associated with resistance to non-depolarising blockers,
so that larger or more frequent doses are needed and the block is shortened,
through both pharmacokinetic and receptor mechanisms.
Hypercalcaemia may antagonise the block. Conditions of upregulated acetylcholine
receptors, such as burns, also produce resistance to non-depolarising agents,
the opposite of their exaggerated response to suxamethonium.
The practical point is that the patient on long-term anticonvulsants and the burns
patient may require more non-depolarising relaxant than expected,
with monitoring to guide dosing.
So enzyme-inducing anticonvulsants and receptor upregulation produce resistance,
in contrast to the many potentiating factors.
How does myasthenia gravis affect the response to these drugs?
Myasthenia gravis, an autoimmune disease in which antibodies reduce the number of
functional acetylcholine receptors at the neuromuscular junction,
makes patients markedly sensitive to non-depolarising blockers,
so that a normal dose produces a profound and prolonged block;
the dose must be greatly reduced, titrated against a nerve stimulator,
and reversal planned carefully.
Conversely, such patients may be relatively resistant to suxamethonium,
needing a larger dose, because there are fewer receptors to depolarise,
though the response is variable. Sugammadex is valuable for reversing an
aminosteroid block in the myasthenic.
The related Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome also confers sensitivity to both
classes of relaxant. So in myasthenia I would use much-reduced doses of a
non-depolarising agent with careful monitoring, or consider avoiding relaxants,
and value sugammadex for reversal.
Define the depths of block used clinically and the monitoring for each.
The depth of block is graded by neuromuscular monitoring.
Intense, or complete, block early after an intubating dose has no response even to
tetanic stimulation and no post-tetanic count.
Deep block has no train-of-four twitches but a measurable post-tetanic count,
which is used to gauge depth at this level.
Moderate, or surgical, block has one to three train-of-four twitches present.
Recovery is tracked by the return of all four twitches and then by the
train-of-four ratio, the ratio of the fourth to the first twitch,
with adequate recovery requiring a ratio of at least ninety per cent.
The relevance is that the depth determines what reversal is possible:
neostigmine needs at least moderate recovery,
whereas sugammadex can reverse deep and intense aminosteroid block.
So the post-tetanic count gauges deep block and the train-of-four and its ratio
gauge the lighter levels and recovery.
Summarise the anaphylaxis risk of the class and the role of sugammadex.
The neuromuscular blockers are among the commonest causes of perioperative
anaphylaxis, with rocuronium and suxamethonium particularly implicated,
and there is cross-reactivity between agents,
so a patient who has reacted to one may react to others,
which guides future avoidance and testing.
Anaphylaxis is managed along standard lines with adrenaline, oxygen and fluids,
with timed tryptase samples and later allergy investigation.
There has been interest in whether sugammadex, by encapsulating rocuronium,
might help terminate rocuronium-induced anaphylaxis by removing the trigger,
and there are case reports of benefit,
but it is not an established or reliable treatment and does not replace adrenaline
and standard management.
So the class carries a significant anaphylaxis risk with cross-reactivity,
and sugammadex is not a substitute for standard anaphylaxis treatment.
How does the choice of agent change in hepatic and renal failure?
In hepatic and renal failure I would choose an agent whose elimination does not
depend on those organs — cisatracurium, or atracurium,
both eliminated by organ-independent Hofmann elimination,
giving a predictable duration without accumulation;
cisatracurium is preferred for its lack of histamine release.
I would avoid or use cautiously the agents that accumulate: pancuronium,
renally excreted and long-acting; vecuronium,
whose active metabolite accumulates in renal failure; and rocuronium,
prolonged in hepatic and to some extent renal impairment,
though reversible by sugammadex.
Mivacurium is prolonged where plasma cholinesterase is reduced,
as in liver disease. So the organ-independent benzylisoquinoliniums,
especially cisatracurium, are the agents of choice in organ failure,
which is one of the most useful practical points about this class.
Pull it together: how do you use the non-depolarising blockers safely?
I would choose the agent to suit the case:
rocuronium as the versatile workhorse and for rapid-sequence induction when a
non-depolarising drug is used, with sugammadex available;
cisatracurium or atracurium where organ-independent elimination is wanted,
as in hepatic or renal failure and the critically ill;
and a short-acting agent for brief procedures.
I would dose to effect, avoiding excess,
and monitor the block quantitatively throughout with a nerve stimulator,
using the train-of-four and, for deep block, the post-tetanic count.
I would ensure adequate recovery before extubation,
confirming a train-of-four ratio of at least ninety per cent,
reversing reliably — with an anticholinesterase once recovery has begun,
or sugammadex for the aminosteroids including deep block — to prevent residual
paralysis.
And I would anticipate the factors that potentiate or antagonise the block and the
agents that accumulate in organ failure. So appropriate agent choice,
quantitative monitoring and reliable reversal are the foundations of safe use.
How are the non-depolarising blockers dosed in the obese patient?
The non-depolarising blockers are generally dosed according to ideal or lean body
weight rather than total body weight in the obese patient,
because dosing by total body weight would give an excessive dose,
prolonging the block and the risk of residual paralysis,
since the drugs distribute mainly in lean tissue and the obese patient does not
require proportionally more.
This contrasts with suxamethonium, dosed to total body weight.
The exception is the rapid-sequence dose of rocuronium,
where some use a higher weight basis to ensure rapid onset,
accepting a longer block reversible by sugammadex.
The practical message is to use lean or ideal body weight for maintenance dosing of
non-depolarising agents in obesity, with quantitative monitoring,
to avoid overdose and prolonged block. So lean-weight dosing and monitoring prevent
excessive block in the obese.
Explain the mechanism of fade and post-tetanic potentiation.
Fade — the progressive decline in the response to successive stimuli of a
train-of-four or to tetanic stimulation — is a hallmark of non-depolarising block
and is thought to arise largely from blockade of prejunctional acetylcholine
receptors that normally provide positive feedback to sustain acetylcholine release
during rapid stimulation; with these blocked,
release fails to keep pace and the response fades.
Post-tetanic potentiation is the transient increase in twitch height immediately
after a tetanic stimulus during partial non-depolarising block,
because the tetanus mobilises and increases acetylcholine release for a short
period, transiently overcoming the block.
Both phenomena reflect the competitive,
prejunctional and postjunctional actions of the blocker and are absent in a phase
one depolarising block, which is why they are used to characterise the type of
block.
So fade and post-tetanic potentiation are the signatures of non-depolarising block.
How does the onset at the laryngeal muscles guide the timing of intubation?
The laryngeal adductor muscles, like the diaphragm,
are relatively resistant to non-depolarising block but also have a faster onset and
offset than the peripheral adductor pollicis, because of their greater blood flow.
The practical consequence is that the larynx is relaxed and ready for intubation
earlier than the monitored adductor pollicis would suggest,
so intubation can often be performed before the train-of-four at the thumb is fully
abolished.
Conversely, the larynx and diaphragm recover earlier than the adductor pollicis,
so monitoring at the thumb gives a conservative,
safe estimate of recovery of the airway and respiratory muscles.
So the differential onset means the larynx is ready for intubation relatively
early, while peripheral monitoring conservatively guides both intubation timing and
the assessment of recovery.
What new neuromuscular blocking agents are in development?
Research has sought an agent combining the rapid onset and short,
organ-independent offset that would be ideal,
particularly a non-depolarising replacement for suxamethonium.
Gantacurium is an experimental ultra-short-acting agent inactivated rapidly by a
non-enzymatic reaction with cysteine and by ester hydrolysis,
giving a fast onset and brief duration,
and it can be reversed by the administration of cysteine.
Related new agents have been explored on the same principle.
The aim is an agent with suxamethonium's speed but without its hyperkalaemia,
malignant-hyperthermia risk and other liabilities, reversible on demand.
These remain investigational, but they illustrate the continuing search for the
ideal relaxant, and the same drive that gave rocuronium-sugammadex its place.
So gantacurium and similar agents represent the ongoing effort to design a clean,
ultra-short, reversible non-depolarising blocker.
Why is residual block such a focus, and how is its incidence reduced?
Residual neuromuscular block is a focus because it is common,
occurring in a substantial proportion of patients when not actively prevented,
and because it causes real harm — airway obstruction,
impaired swallowing and aspiration,
hypoxaemia and respiratory complications — from even a modest residual block with a
train-of-four ratio below ninety per cent,
and because it is reliably missed by clinical and visual assessment.
Its incidence is reduced by routine use of quantitative neuromuscular monitoring
throughout, by avoiding unnecessary or excessive dosing,
by choosing agents appropriately, by reversing reliably with the right agent and
dose for the depth of block — sugammadex for the aminosteroids including deep
block, neostigmine only once recovery has begun — and by confirming a train-of-four
ratio of at least ninety per cent before extubation.
So the combination of quantitative monitoring and reliable,
depth-matched reversal is what has reduced this under-recognised hazard.
How would you choose a relaxant for a short day-case procedure?
For a short day-case procedure I would want a relaxant whose block is brief or
readily and completely reversible, so as to ensure full recovery and avoid residual
block delaying discharge.
The options are a short-acting agent such as mivacurium,
whose block recovers in fifteen to twenty minutes;
an intermediate agent such as rocuronium or atracurium given in a modest dose and
reversed; or rocuronium reversed promptly and completely by sugammadex,
which gives reliable rapid recovery and is attractive for ambulatory surgery
despite its cost.
I would avoid long-acting pancuronium. In all cases I would monitor quantitatively
and confirm full recovery before waking.
So for day-case work I would use a short-acting agent or an intermediate agent with
reliable reversal, often rocuronium with sugammadex,
to ensure prompt complete recovery.
Summarise how the choice and conduct of non-depolarising blockade fits the whole
anaesthetic.
Neuromuscular blockade is one component of a balanced anaesthetic,
providing relaxation for intubation and surgery while hypnosis and analgesia are
provided separately, and it must never be allowed to substitute for inadequate
anaesthesia in a paralysed patient, with depth-of-anaesthesia awareness in mind.
I would select the agent for the onset, duration,
organ function and reversal plan required,
dose it to lean body weight and to effect,
and monitor the block quantitatively throughout.
I would relate the dose to the co-administered volatile agent,
which potentiates the block, and to factors such as magnesium, aminoglycosides,
hypothermia and the patient's neuromuscular status.
And I would ensure complete, confirmed recovery before extubation,
reversing reliably.
So non-depolarising blockade is integrated into the whole anaesthetic,
chosen and monitored to give the relaxation required and full recovery at the end,
without compromising hypnosis or analgesia.
What is the rationale for using a non-depolarising blocker rather than continuing
without relaxation once the airway is secured?
Once the airway is secured, a non-depolarising blocker is used where the surgery
genuinely requires muscle relaxation — to provide optimal operating conditions for
abdominal, thoracic and certain orthopaedic and microsurgical procedures,
to prevent movement during critical steps,
and to allow controlled ventilation without the patient fighting the ventilator —
rather than relying on deep anaesthesia alone,
which would require dangerously high concentrations of hypnotic and analgesic to
achieve the same relaxation.
Using a relaxant therefore permits a lighter,
safer plane of general anaesthesia while still giving good surgical conditions,
the components of hypnosis, analgesia and relaxation being provided separately and
titrated independently in balanced anaesthesia.
The trade-off is the need for monitoring and reliable reversal to prevent residual
block. So a non-depolarising blocker is used when relaxation is genuinely needed,
allowing lighter anaesthesia with good operating conditions, within a balanced,
monitored technique.
How do you confirm adequate recovery clinically if quantitative monitoring is
unavailable, and why is this inferior?
If quantitative monitoring is unavailable,
clinical tests have traditionally been used to suggest adequate recovery — a
sustained head lift for five seconds, a sustained hand grip,
the ability to protrude the tongue, an adequate tidal volume and vital capacity,
and a sustained response to tetanic stimulation without fade on a peripheral nerve
stimulator.
The fundamental problem is that all of these are insensitive:
a patient can pass them while still having a train-of-four ratio well below ninety
per cent, so significant residual block,
with its risk of airway obstruction and aspiration, is missed.
Even the visual or tactile assessment of fade on a nerve stimulator cannot reliably
detect a ratio above about forty per cent. This is precisely why quantitative
monitoring, giving an objective train-of-four ratio,
is recommended over clinical signs.
So clinical tests are reassuring only when clearly failed,
and their inability to exclude residual block is the reason objective monitoring is
preferred. So I would rely on quantitative confirmation wherever possible,
treating clinical signs as supportive but inadequate alone.
Thank you. That was a thorough and well-structured account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Non-depolarising blockers are competitive antagonists at the junctional
nicotinic receptor (no fasciculations);
the block shows fade and post-tetanic potentiation and is overcome by raising
acetylcholine — the basis of anticholinesterase reversal.
Second, They divide into aminosteroids (rocuronium, vecuronium,
pancuronium) and benzylisoquinoliniums (atracurium, cisatracurium, mivacurium);
potency and onset are inversely related,
so the less-potent rocuronium has the fastest onset.
Third, Atracurium and cisatracurium undergo organ-independent Hofmann elimination —
ideal in hepatic/renal failure; aminosteroids and pancuronium accumulate in organ
impairment, and mivacurium depends on plasma cholinesterase.
Fourth, Adverse effects: histamine release (atracurium, mivacurium),
vagolytic tachycardia (pancuronium),
and the class is a leading cause of anaphylaxis;
residual block (TOF ratio <0.9) is common, dangerous and under-detected.
Fifth, Use quantitative neuromuscular monitoring (train-of-four,
post-tetanic count), dose to effect, confirm a TOF ratio ≥0.9 before extubation,
and reverse reliably — anticholinesterase once recovery has begun,
or sugammadex for aminosteroids including deep block.
Thank you. That concludes the station.